---
title: Loss-free Balancing in MoEs (2)
date: 2025-07-06
tags: [cs, finance, ai]
author: R
location: Above around Ust-Ilimsk, Russia while on a plane from New York to Hong Kong
---

(On second thought) I should've just annotated the paper instead of writing this. Reading sth. as this bright on an airplane with the lights off felt like some type of torture. I couldn't fall asleep in the tiny space, and when I woke up the screen is still on, that made me felt that I have to finish it before doing anything else.

#### Solution: EC (Expert Choice)
The authors of the paper have indicated that this approach *break the causal constraint* (causing a leakage in future information which *destroys the generalization of a model and prevents reliable evaluation*). They have even proved their hypothesis (*that the loss drop originates from the model’s accessing and exploiting future token information*) through experiment:
Theoretically

#### Solution: Loss-Free Balancing
This approach is what the authors of this paper have come up with. Essentially introducing a bias factor without adding some noisy gradients like the Auxiliary-loss one does.

## MoE in Trading
And there's [the 2023 paper](https://personal.ntu.edu.sg/boan/papers/KDD23_Stock.pdf) (Sun et al., 2023) which builds a MoE in order to account for multiple metrics, which differs from mainstream deep learning models being used in the industry.

## For me
I guess my main task is that to apply Loss-Free Balancing for an MoE model.

Because just looking at the time of the publication and practices around I'd say the majority of the industry is still using deep learning models that are dependent on a single indicator.

While attempts could be made (and I'm sure there have been such attempts all around) to take in more indicators, it seems like that building a MoE model which overcomes drawbacks in auxiliary-loss implementations could be advantageous.